TLS reference guide review: Follow-up (#42706)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/tls-registry-reference.adoc

:topics: TLS, http, SSL, HTTPS, security, network
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-tls-registry

> The TLS Registry is a Quarkus extension that centralizes TLS configuration, making it easier to manage and maintain secure connections across your application.

Reviewer: This is a reference guide, not a tutorial or a how-to; the content and stale are expected. There is no TLS tutorial or how-to guides, and I don't have anything planned.

> By defining TLS configurations in a single, centralized location, the TLS Registry allows you to reference these configurations from multiple components within the application, ensuring consistency and reducing the potential for configuration errors.

Reviewer: +1

> The TLS Registry consolidates settings and supports multiple named configurations, enabling you to tailor TLS settings for different application parts.

Reviewer: +1

This flexibility is particularly useful when different components require distinct security configurations.

> Additionally, the TLS Registry extension is automatically included in your project when you use compatible extensions such as Quarkus REST, gRPC, or Reactive Routes, enabling applications to be ready to handle secure communications out of the box.

Reviewer: +1

TLS Registry also provides features like automatic certificate reloading, Let's Encrypt (ACME) integration, Kubernetes Cert-Manager support, and compatibility with various keystore formats, such as PKCS12, PEM, and JKS.

[#using-the-tls-registry]
== Using the TLS registry

To configure a TLS connection, including key and trust stores, use the `+quarkus.tls.*+` properties.

> These properties are required for setting up the default TLS configuration, defined directly under `+quarkus.tls.*+`, and for creating separate, named configurations by using `+quarkus.tls.<name>.*+`.

Reviewer: +1

> By specifying `+quarkus.tls.<name>.*+` properties, you can adapt TLS settings for specific connections.

Reviewer: it's not really a "connection" (I would avoid that word because it means something different when we say TLS connection). I would use "component".

Author: OK! Applying :).

> By specifying `+quarkus.tls.<name>.*+` properties, you can adapt TLS settings for specific connections.

Author: ```suggestion
By specifying the `+quarkus.tls.<name>.*+` properties, you can adapt the TLS settings for a specific component.
```

=== Configuring HTTPS for a HTTP server

> The client is often required to verify the server's authenticity, which is the common practice that ensures secure client-server communication.

Reviewer: +1

> The server must use a keystore containing its certificate and private key, while the client needs to be configured with a truststore to validate the server's certificate.

Reviewer: +1

> During the TLS handshake, the server presents its certificate, which the client then validates to establish a secure connection.

Reviewer: this is slightly more complex. I would stop that sentence at "validates".  

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/265b9b64-c591-40b6-b636-806637247782)

Author: Will do!

> During the TLS handshake, the server presents its certificate, which the client then validates to establish a secure connection.

Author: ```suggestion
During the TLS handshake, the server presents its certificate, which the client then validates.
```

This prevents man-in-the-middle attacks and secures data transmission.

The following sections guide you in setting up HTTPS by using PEM or PKCS12 keystore types,and how to use named configurations to specify and manage multiple TLS setups at once, allowing you to define distinct settings for each.

Use one of the following configuration examples based on your keystore type:

* *By using PEM files:*
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.0.cert=server.crt
quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.0.key=server.key
quarkus.http.insecure-requests=disabled # Reject HTTP requests
----

* *By using a `p12` (PKCS12) keystore:*
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.key-store.p12.path=server-keystore.p12
quarkus.tls.key-store.p12.password=secret
quarkus.http.insecure-requests=disabled # Reject HTTP requests
----

> * *Distinguishing multiple configurations with names:*

Reviewer 2: It's not a variant of the same configuration. It's a way to distinguish multiple configurations, so it's conceptually on a different level.

> * *Distinguishing multiple configurations with names:*

Author: Thank you for explaining, @jmartisk !

quarkus.http.tls-configuration-name=https
----

=== Configuring HTTPS for a client

> The following example configures a gRPC client named "hello" to use HTTPS with a truststore from the default TLS configuration:

Reviewer 2: I'm inclined to having **the** gRPC client named "hello". 
The point is that if your application has a bunch of named gRPC clients, by doing this you configure one of them.
We could also keep "a", but then it should rather be
> a gRPC client (named "hello" in this example)

Reviewer 3: Using "the" would work only if the user has a bunch of clients and one of them is reliably called "hello" - which I don't think is the case.

For comparison - "I fixed a difficult bug" (implying there are many difficult bugs and I fixed one of them), as opposed to "I fixed the difficult bug" (implying I had several bugs assigned, but only one was difficult, and I fixed it).

Reviewer 2: > Using "the" would work only if the user has a bunch of clients and one of them is reliably called "hello" - which I don't think is the case.

What makes you think that's not the case? If there is a named client, it probably means that the user has multiple clients (if there was only one client, the user likely wouldn't have given the client a name).

Reviewer: gRPC clients always have a name, even if you have a single one.

Reviewer 2: Ah, ok, I thought there is a notion of an unnamed client in gRPC but there isn't.
Anyway my point still stands, because one name always identifies exactly one client.

Reviewer 3: @jmartisk , grammar-wise, your own suggestion "The following example configures a gRPC client (named "hello" in this example)" almost completely overlaps with "The following example configures a gRPC client named "hello"".

Using "...configures the gRPC client named "hello"..." would only apply in a context where it is established that one of the clients is named "hello" - which doesn't really apply here, as far as I can tell. Feel free to correct me if that's not accurate, though.

Reviewer 2: The user can name the client whatever they want. In this example, we assume that they named one client "hello". I'd say it's quite standard to invent an example name in documentation. If you prefer, we can name it something in capital letters to make it look more like a placeholder.

quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.b.key=my-second-key.key
----

In most cases, you only need a single pair consisting of a certificate and a private key.
Even if the certificate is part of a certificate chain, it includes only one private key corresponding to the end-entity certificate.

When multiple pairs are configured, the selection of one of the configured pairs of certificates and private keys is based on Server Name Indication (SNI).
The client sends the name of the server to which the client is attempting to connect, and the server selects the appropriate pair of certificates and private keys.
To use this feature, ensure that xref:./tls-registry-reference.adoc#sni[SNI] is enabled on both the client and server.

IMPORTANT: When configuring multiple key pairs or certificate pairs, the server executes the configured pairs in a lexicographical order of their names by default, as demonstrated with `store.pem.a` and `store.pem.b` in the previous example.

> The pair with the lowest lexicographical order is executed first.

Author: Done!

quarkus.tls.key-store.p12.alias-password=my-alias-password
----

* Alternatively, use SNI to select the appropriate certificate and private key.
Note that all keys must use the same password.

==== JKS key stores

JKS keystores are single files that contain the certificate and the private key for the server or client, used to authenticate and establish secure communications in TLS/SSL connections.

JKS is an old but still widely used Java-specific format.
However, to work with this format, you must use specific, and nowadays also deprecated, Java tooling.
Thus, its use with your {project-name} application is not recommended.

> Additionally, OpenShift cert-manager or Let's Encrypt does not typically provide JKS and remains PEM-only.

Author: Cool. Will add it to a IMPORTANT block.

PKCS12 trust stores are a single file containing the certificates.
You can use the alias to select the appropriate certificate when multiple certificates are included.

* To configure a PKCS12 truststore:
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.trust-store.p12.path=client-truststore.p12
quarkus.tls.trust-store.p12.password=password
quarkus.tls.trust-store.p12.alias=my-alias
----
+
`.p12` files are password-protected, so you need to provide the password to open the truststore.
However, unlike key stores, the alias does not require a password because it contains a public certificate, not a private key.

> 

Author: Done! Thank you! :)

You can use the alias to select the appropriate certificate when multiple certificates are present.
However, avoid using the JKS format as it is less secure than PKCS12.

* To configure a JKS truststore:
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.trust-store.jks.path=client-truststore.jks
quarkus.tls.trust-store.jks.password=password
quarkus.tls.trust-store.jks.alias=my-alias
----
+
`.jks` files are password-protected, so you need to provide the password to open the truststore.
However, unlike keystores, the alias does not require a password because it contains a public certificate, not a private key.

> ==== Credential providers

Reviewer 3: There seems to be repetition of the same-named sections (but with different content) - PEM, JKS, Credentials providers...

I don't think that's a good thing for a reference doc. Perhaps try to think about if the same-named sections could be joined together, somehow...

Instead of passing the truststore password in the configuration, you can use a credential provider.
A credential provider allows you to retrieve passwords and other credentials.
Note that the credential provider is used only if the password is not set in the configuration.

> * To configure a credential provider:
> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To configure a credential provider:

```

# The key used to retrieve the truststore password, `password` by default
quarkus.tls.trust-store.credentials-provider.password-key=password
----

> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 
```

==== Cipher suites

> Cipher suites are the list of ciphers that you can use during the TLS handshake.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cipher suites are a list of ciphers that you can use during the TLS handshake.
```

> You can configure the ordered list of enabled cipher suites.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can configure an ordered list of enabled cipher suites.
```

> If not configured, a reasonable default is selected from the built-in ciphers.

Reviewer 3: What does "reasonable" mean here? Not very informative for the reader, IMHO. And if the specific definition of how the default is selected is not important, perhaps this sentence should not be here at all.

However, when specified, your configuration precedes the default suite defined by the SSL engine in use.

> * To configure the cipher suites:
> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To configure the cipher suites:

```

The relevant configuration property is `quarkus.tls.protocols` (or `quarkus.tls.<name>.protocols` for named TLS configurations).
It defaults to `TLSv1.3, TLSv1.2` if not configured.

> Available options are `TLSv1`, `TLSv1.1`, `TLSv1.2`, `TLSv1.3`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The available options are `TLSv1`, `TLSv1.1`, `TLSv1.2`, and `TLSv1.3`.
```

> * To only enable, for example, `TLSv1.3`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* For example, to only enable `TLSv1.3`:
```

> 

Reviewer 3: The second sentence in the previous paragraph mostly just repeats the first sentence, so I think a large part of it can be cut out. Also, "efficient communication" is pretty vague. What sort of communication are we talking about? And between what SW/HW components?

This helps in scenarios like HTTP/2, where multiple protocols might be available, allowing for faster protocol selection.

> * ALPN is enabled by default, and it can be disabled by:

Reviewer 3: When/why would you disable it? Can it have detrimental performance impact, maybe?

Reviewer: Yeah, there are performance reasons, but only experts would disable it (hopefully). Without it, you are going into uncharted territory. 

Again, this guide contains expert-level knowledge. Do not disable ALPN if you do not understand its meaning.

Reviewer: Remove the section of your don't think it's useful. 
I can just tell that I had to disable Alpn a few times in various projects for various reasons (native inconsistencies, performance...), and not having to dig into the code to find how to do that can save a lot of time.

Author: I will try to integrate this info into it.

Author: Warning: Disabling ALPN is not recommended for non-experts, as it can lead to performance degradation, protocol negotiation issues, and unexpected behavior, particularly with protocols like HTTP/2. However, disabling ALPN can be useful for diagnosing native inconsistencies or testing performance in specific edge cases where protocol negotiation causes conflicts.

> * ALPN is enabled by default, and it can be disabled by:
> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ALPN is enabled by default. To disable it:

```

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.alpn=false
----

==== Certificate Revocation List (CRL)

> A Certificate Revocation List (CRL) is a list of certificates the issuing Certificate Authority (CA) revoked before their scheduled expiration date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Certificate Revocation List (CRL) is a list of certificates that the issuing Certificate Authority (CA) revoked before their scheduled expiration date.
```

When a certificate is compromised, no longer needed, or deemed invalid, the CA adds it to the CRL to inform relying parties not to trust it anymore.

> You can configure the CRL with the list of certificate files you no longer trust using the DER or PKCS#7 (P7B) formats.
> For the DER format, pass DER-encoded CRLs.
> For the PKCS#7 format, pass the `SignedData` object, where the only significant field is `crls`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can configure the CRL with the list of certificate files you no longer trust by using the DER or PKCS#7 (P7B) formats.

* For the DER format, pass DER-encoded CRLs.
* For the PKCS#7 format, pass the `SignedData` object, where the only significant field is `crls`.
```

> * To configure the CRL:
> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To configure the CRL:

```

It is useful to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks and often defaults to `HTTPS` or `LDAPS`.
====

> 

Author: Will do it in a follow-up commit! :)

TlsConfiguration named = certificates.get("name").orElseThrow();
//...
----
+
The `TlsConfiguration` object contains the key stores, trust stores, cipher suites, protocols, and other properties.
It also provides a way to create an `SSLContext` from the configuration.

> 

Author: Will do!

A value of `true` means the reload operation was successful, not necessarily that there were updates to the certificates.

After a `TlsConfiguration` has been reloaded, servers and clients using this configuration may need to perform specific actions to apply the new certificates.

> * The recommended approach is to trigger a CDI event,`CertificateReloadedEvent` (this is a custom class you have to implement, it’s not provided by {project-name}), for servers and clients to listen to and update their configurations as shown below:

Reviewer: it is provided.

> * The recommended approach is to trigger a CDI event,`CertificateReloadedEvent` (this is a custom class you have to implement, it’s not provided by {project-name}), for servers and clients to listen to and update their configurations as shown below:

Author: ```suggestion
* The recommended approach is to trigger the provided CDI event, `CertificateReloadedEvent`, a custom class available in Quarkus, which servers and clients can listen to in order to update their configurations, as shown below:
```

Author: @cescoffier Hello Clement! Do you agree with this new formulation above, which is based on your feedback?

> When the application starts, the TLS registry performs several checks to ensure the configuration is correct:

Author: Your application is the application for which you are configuring the TLS. It is "your application."
@jmartisk Is that correct?

> When the application starts, the TLS registry performs several checks to ensure the configuration is correct:

Reviewer 2: Well, yes. This applies to any application that uses the TLS extension.

A value of `true` means the reload operation was successful, not necessarily that there were updates to the certificates.

After a `TlsConfiguration` has been reloaded, servers and clients using this configuration may need to perform specific actions to apply the new certificates.

* The recommended approach is to trigger the provided CDI event, `CertificateReloadedEvent`, a custom class available in Quarkus, which servers and clients can listen to in order to update their configurations, as shown below:

> +

Reviewer 2: "Custom class available in Quarkus" is a nonsense. It is custom exactly because the user has to write it himself.

The recommended approach for letting clients and servers know about the certificate reload is to create a CDI event and fire it. That means the user has to:

- Create a class that represents the event (in the example below, it is called `CertificateReloadedEvent`). 
  - The class should have at least a field of type `TlsConfiguration` that carries information about the new certificates for the affected TLS configuration
  - If using multiple TLS configurations, the class should also contain the name of the affected TLS configuration
- Inject the CDI event in the class where the reloading occurs
- When a reloading occurs, fire the event

Btw the "injecting" part is missing from the example below. The example needs two adjustments IMO:
- You have to inject the CDI event to be able to fire it, so this should  be at the beginning:
```
@Inject
Event<CertificateReloadedEvent> event;
```

- In the snippet we also have a clash for the `event` identifier, / (the `onReload` method kinda looks like it's in the same class even though it will probably be in a different class in reality), so we should change the `onReload` method argument's name from `event` to something else.. Maybe `certificateReloadedEvent`

> +

Author: Applied. Will add it in the next commit! Thank you so much @jmartisk .

=== Using Kubernetes secrets

> . By using the secret below as an example, create a secret with the key stores and trust stores to use Kubernetes secrets:

Author: "keystores" and "truststores". Hmm, strange, I thought I hunted them all down already. Will add it to my list. Thank you, @jherrman

To have OpenShift generate a certificate, annotate an existing _Service_ object.
The generated certificate will be stored in a secret, which you can then mount in your pod.

> . Consider the following _Service_ example:

Author: Workin on it!

    app.kubernetes.io/version: ...
  type: ClusterIP
----
+
The annotation `service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name` instructs OpenShift to generate a certificate and store it in a secret named `my-tls-secret`.

> . To use the stored certificate, add this annotation to your already running service:

Reviewer 2: I don't get this - the following snippet doesn't show how to use the certificate, it's just another way to have it generated (equivalent to the previous YAML-based snippet, but for applying to an already existing service)

Reviewer 2: As for "Using the certificate", that's just the snippet described as

> Mount the secret as a volume in your pod by updating your _Deployment_ configuration:

Because by  using it, one usually  means mounting it into a deployment

Reviewer: it's a prerequisite to use the certificate. This annotation actually trigger the generation of a certificate for this service. 

Maybe rephrase with:

```
To generate a certificate, add his annotation to your already created Kubernetes `service`
```

Reviewer 2: But in the previous YAML snippet there's already 
```
service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name: my-tls-secret
```

so calling
```
oc annotate service hero-service \
     service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name=my-tls-secret
```
won't have any effect no? It's just a way to add it to an existing service rather than when creating it from scratch (YAML).

Reviewer: let's me check, it may have been a mistake when I copy the content (I may have annotated it already)

Reviewer: you are right, we need to remove the:
```
annotations:
    service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name: my-tls-secret
```

from the YAML of the service.

Reviewer 2: Ok so @MichalMaler I would 

- change this line to
> To generate a certificate, add this annotation to your already created Kubernetes `service`

- remove the 
```
  annotations:
    service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name: my-tls-secret
``` 
from the previous YAML snippet

and move the sentence 

> The annotation `service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name` instructs OpenShift to generate a certificate and store it in a secret named `my-tls-secret`.

after the `oc annotate ...` snippet

Author: Done n done! Thank you both, @jmartisk @cescoffier

              name: https
              protocol: TCP
----
<1> Define a volume to mount the secret.
Use the same name as the secret declared above.
<2> Set up the keystore with the paths to the certificate and private key.
This can be configured using environment variables or configuration files.
Here, we use environment variables.
OpenShift serving certificates always create the `tls.crt` and `tls.key` files.
<3> Mount the secret in the container.
Ensure the path matches the one used in the configuration (here `/etc/tls`).
<4> Configure the port to serve HTTPS.
+
. Deploy your application to use the certificate generated by OpenShift.
This will make the service available over HTTPS.

NOTE: By setting the `quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.acme.cert` and `quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.acme.key` variables (or their environment variable variant as done above), the TLS registry will use the certificate and private key from the secret.
This configures the default keystore for the Quarkus HTTP server, allowing it to use the certificate.
For information about using this certificate in a named configuration, see <<referencing-a-tls-configuration>>.

=== Trusting the Certificate Authority (CA)

> Now that your service uses a certificate issued by OpenShift, configure your client applications to trust this certificate.

Author: Working on it.

}
----
<1> Configure the base URI and the configuration key.
The name must be in the format `<service-name>.<namespace>.svc`; otherwise, the certificate will not be trusted.
Ensure that the `configKey` is also configured.

. Configure the REST client to trust the CA certificate generated by OpenShift:
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.rest-client.hero.tls-configuration-name=my-service-tls # <1>
quarkus.tls.my-service-tls.trust-store.pem.certs=/deployments/tls/service-ca.crt # <2>
----
<1> Configure the `hero` REST client with the TLS configuration named `my-service-tls`.
<2> Set up the `my-service-tls` TLS configuration, specifically the truststore with the CA certificate.
Ensure the path matches the one used in the Kubernetes _Deployment_ configuration.
The file is always named `service-ca.crt`.

=== Certificate renewal

> OpenShift automatically renews the certificates it generates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenShift automatically renews the serving certificates it generates.
```

When the certificate is renewed, the secret is updated with the new certificate and private key.

> . To ensure your application uses the new certificate, you can leverage the Quarkus TLS registry's periodic reloading feature.
> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure your application uses the new certificate, you can use the periodic reloading feature of the Quarkus TLS registry.

```

By setting the `reload-period` property, the TLS registry will periodically check the key stores and trust stores for changes and reload them if needed:

> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.reload-period=24h
----

. Optionally, implement a custom mechanism to reload the certificates when the secret is updated.

> See <<reloading-certificates>> for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See xref:reloading-certificates[] for more information.
```

Author: Hello @jherrman  Jirka, We are not doing this manually. We keep the xrefs in this format and use a script for the automatic conversion.

> == Quarkus CLI commands and development CA (Certificate Authority)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
== Quarkus CLI commands and development Certificate Authority
```

The TLS registry provides CLI commands to generate a development CA and trusted certificates.
This avoids having to use self-signed certificates locally.

.An example of managing TLS certificates with Quarkus CLI:
[source,shell]
----
> quarkus tls

> Install and Manage TLS development certificates

Reviewer: It's to show the different sub-commands. 

It also gives a hint to the user to verify if these commands are available.

Without it, the user would not know that `quarkus tls` can be executed to display the help.

> 

Reviewer: Manual import of the CA in your OS.

> 

Author: Applying.

> . Generate a development CA:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To generate a development CA:
```

Reviewer 3: Also, line 1040 (the heading) should probably be `=== Generating a development CA`

+
[source,shell]
----
quarkus tls generate-ca-certificate --install --renew --truststore <1> <2> <3>
----
<1> `--install` installs the CA in the system truststore.
Windows, Mac, and Linux (Fedora and Ubuntu) are supported.
However, depending on your browser, you might need to import the generated CA manually.
Refer to your browser's documentation for more information.
The generated CA is located in `$HOME/.quarkus/quarkus-dev-root-ca.pem`.
<2> `--renew` renews the CA if it already exists.
When this option is used, the private key is changed, so you need to regenerate the certificates signed by the CA.
If the CA expires, it will automatically renew without requiring the `--renew` option.

> <3> `--truststore` also generates a PKCS12 truststore containing the CA certificate.

Reviewer: Hum, initially, we used a multi-line command. I think it will have to be reverted to a multiline one.

> <3> `--truststore` also generates a PKCS12 truststore containing the CA certificate.

Author: @jmartisk @cescoffier Hello, guys. Do you agree? If yes, I will make it happen. Thank you n cheers!

> <3> `--truststore` also generates a PKCS12 truststore containing the CA certificate.

Author: @cescoffier Please share the code here, and I will add it to the batch! :)

> <3> `--truststore` also generates a PKCS12 truststore containing the CA certificate.

Author: THX, @jmartisk !
```
[source,shell]
----
quarkus tls generate-ca-certificate --install \   <1>
     --renew \     <2>
     --truststore  <3>
----
```

> === Generate a trusted (signed) certificate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Generating a trusted (signed) certificate
```

> . After installing the Quarkus Development CA, generate a trusted certificate.

Reviewer 3: Link/xref, or maybe an explicit prerequisite?

                      The password of the keystore. Default is 'password'
  -r, --renew         Whether existing certificates will need to be replaced
----
+
A `.env` file is also generated when generating the certificate, making the Quarkus dev mode aware of these certificates.

. Run your application in dev mode to use these certificates:
+
[source,shell]
----
./mvnw quarkus:dev
...
INFO  [io.quarkus] (Quarkus Main Thread) demo 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT on JVM (powered by Quarkus 999-SNAPSHOT) started in 1.286s. Listening on: http://localhost:8080 and https://localhost:8443
----

> . Open the Dev UI using HTTPS: `https://localhost:8443/q/dev` or issue a request using `curl`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Open the Dev UI by using HTTPS: `https://localhost:8443/q/dev` or by issuing a `curl` request:
```

+
[source,shell]
----
curl https://localhost:8443/hello
Hello from Quarkus REST%
----
+

> IMPORTANT: A self-signed certificate is generated if the Quarkus Development CA is not installed.

Reviewer 3: Any way to get the passive out of this sentence, at least partly?

Reviewer: If the Quarkus Development CA is not installed, Quarkus generates a self-signed certificate instead.

Author: Great, I will go with this iteration:
Quarkus generates a self-signed certificate if the Quarkus Development CA is not installed.

> IMPORTANT: A self-signed certificate is generated if the Quarkus Development CA is not installed.

Author: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Quarkus generates a self-signed certificate if the Quarkus Development CA is not installed.
```

=== Generating a self-signed certificate

> * Even if the Quarkus Development CA is installed, you can generate a self-signed certificate:
> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even if the Quarkus Development CA is installed, you can generate a self-signed certificate:

```

[source,shell]
----
quarkus tls generate-certificate --name my-cert --self-signed
----

> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 
```

Follow the steps below to have your Quarkus application prepared and automatically updated with new and renewed Let's Encrypt certificates.

[[lets-encrypt-prerequisites]]
.Prerequisites

> . Ensure that a fully resolvable DNS domain name is available that you can use to access your application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Ensure that a fully resolvable DNS domain name is available that you can use to access your application.
```

You can use this domain name to create a Let's Encrypt account and pass the Let's Encrypt ACME challenges to prove that you own this domain.
You can use https://ngrok.com/[ngrok] to start experimenting with the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature; for more information, see the <<lets-encrypt-ngrok,Testing with ngrok>> section below.

> . Your Quarkus HTTPS application must use a _build-time_ property to enable a Let's Encrypt ACME challenge route:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Your Quarkus HTTPS application must use a _build-time_ property to enable a Let's Encrypt ACME challenge route:
```

You can use this domain name to create a Let's Encrypt account and pass the Let's Encrypt ACME challenges to prove that you own this domain.
You can use https://ngrok.com/[ngrok] to start experimenting with the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature; for more information, see the <<lets-encrypt-ngrok,Testing with ngrok>> section below.

[source, properties]
. Your Quarkus HTTPS application must use a _build-time_ property to enable a Let's Encrypt ACME challenge route:
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.lets-encrypt.enabled=true
----

+
The TLS registry can manage the challenge process from either the main HTTP interface or the management interface.
Using a management interface is **strongly** recommended to let Quarkus deal with ACME challenge configuration separately from the main application's deployment and security requirements:

[source, properties]
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.lets-encrypt.enabled=true
quarkus.management.enabled=true
----

+
The challenge is served from the primary HTTP interface (accessible from your DNS domain name).

+
IMPORTANT: Do not start your application yet.

> === Application preparation

Reviewer 4: Would be worth keeping a dedicated section related to preparing the app ? It may involve several steps going forward

> . Before you request a Let's Encrypt certificate, you must run the TLS registry Let's Encrypt CLI `prepare` command to prepare your application:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Before you request a Let's Encrypt certificate, you must run the TLS registry Let's Encrypt CLI `prepare` command to prepare your application:
```

* Creates a `.env` configuration file in your application's root directory and configures the application to use the self-signed domain certificate and private key (until we get the Let's Encrypt certificate)
+
The following snippet shows an example of the generated `.env` file:
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.acme.cert=.letsencrypt/lets-encrypt.crt
quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.acme.key=.letsencrypt/lets-encrypt.key
----
+
NOTE: The `.env` file does not contain the `quarkus.tls.lets-encrypt.enabled` and `quarkus.management.enabled` properties as they are build-time properties that require a rebuild of the application.

> .Procedure

Reviewer 4: `Procedure` reads a bit unusual

Author: Well, it is a way RHBQ docs are being written down - to rewrite the text so that headings are not needed if they can be replaced by a procedure with steps.
Besides, `=== Start your application` is not a great heading :))

. Start your application:
+
[source,shell]
----
java -jar quarkus-run.jar
----

.. Access your application endpoint by using `https://your-domain-name:8443/`; for example, `https://your-domain-name:8443/hello`, and accept a self-signed certificate in the browser.

.. Keep the application running and request your first Let's Encrypt certificate.

> . [[lets-encrypt-issue-certificate]] Issue certificate:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. [[lets-encrypt-issue-certificate]] Issue a certificate:
```

----
<1> Set your domain name.
<2> Provide your contact email address that Let's Encrypt can use to contact you in case of any issues with your Let's Encrypt account.
<3> Set your application management URL, which you can use to handle ACME challenges.
Use `https://localhost:8443/` if you choose not to enable a management router in the <<lets-encrypt-prerequisites,Let's Encrypt prerequisites>> step.

.. During the processing of the `issue-certificate` command, the TLS registry CLI performs the following tasks:

* Checks if the application is prepared to serve the challenge.
* Creates and records Let's Encrypt account information.
* Issues a Let's Encrypt certificate request.
* Interacts with the Quarkus application to resolve ACME challenges.
+

> NOTE: Once the Let's Encrypt certificate chain and private key have been successfully acquired, they are converted to PEM format and copied to your application's `.letsencrypt` folder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: When the Let's Encrypt certificate chain and private key have been successfully acquired, they are converted to PEM format and copied to your application's `.letsencrypt` folder.
```

The TLS registry is informed that a new certificate and private key are ready and reloads them automatically.
+
. Access your application's endpoint using `https://your-domain-name:8443/` again.
Confirm in the browser that the Let's Encrypt certificate authority is now signing your domain certificate.
+
Note that currently, the `issue-certificate` command implicitly creates a Let's Encrypt account to make it easy for users to get started with the ACME protocol.
Support for the Let's Encrypt account management will evolve further.

> . Renew certificate:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Renew a certificate:
```
Should it be a step in the same procedure, though? I'm guessing you don't need to renew a certificate that you just issued, no?

Author: @cescoffier Clement, is this about applying the newly issued certificate and replacing the previous one?

Author: Or maybe this is a separate section since back then, it was sorted by headings, not by numbered steps as I tried to apply, thus it was not meant to be a part of the same procedure.

.. Run the following command to renew your Let's Encrypt certificate:
+
[source,shell]
----
quarkus tls lets-encrypt renew-certificate \
  --domain=<domain-dns-name> <1>
----
<1> Set your domain name.
+
During this command, TLS registry CLI reads a Let's Encrypt account information recorded during the <<lets-encrypt-issue-certificate,Issue certificates with Let's Encrypt>> step, issues a Let's Encrypt certificate request, and communicates with a Quarkus application to have ACME challenges resolved.
+
Once the Let's Encrypt certificate chain and private key have been successfully renewed, they are converted to PEM format and copied to your application's `.letsencrypt` folder.
The TLS registry is notified when a new certificate and private key are ready, and it automatically reloads them.

. [[lets-encrypt-ngrok]] Testing with ngrok:
+
https://ngrok.com/[ngrok] can be used to provide a secure HTTPS tunnel to your application running on localhost, and make it easy to test HTTPS based applications.
+
ngrok provides a simplified way of getting started with the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature.

> .. Ask ngrok to reserve a domain:

Reviewer 4: Is it too fine-grained ? The single sentence that follows nearly repeats  it

+
You can use https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-ngrok[Quarkiverse ngrok] in dev mode or reserve it directly in the ngrok dashboard.
Unfortunately, you cannot use your ngrok domain to test the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature immediately.
This is because ngrok itself uses Let's Encrypt and intercepts ACME challenges that are meant to be handled by the Quarkus application instead.

.. Therefore, remove the ngrok Let's Encrypt certificate policy from your ngrok domain:
+
[source,shell]
----
ngrok api --api-key <YOUR-API-KEY> reserved-domains delete-certificate-management-policy <YOUR-RESERVED-DOMAIN-ID>
----
+
`YOUR-RESERVED-DOMAIN-ID` is your reserved domain's id which starts from `rd_`, you can find it in the https://dashboard.ngrok.com/cloud-edge/domains[ngrok dashboard domains section].

> .. Now, because ngrok only forwards ACME challenges over HTTP, start ngrok as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. Because ngrok only forwards ACME challenges over HTTP, start ngrok by using the following command:
```

+
[source,shell]
----
ngrok http --domain <YOUR-NGROK-DOMAIN> 8080 --scheme http <1>
----
<1> `8080` is the localhost HTTP port your application is listening on.

> .. Test the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature from your local machine.

Author: @sberyozkin Hello Sergey! Do you think we need to add some more information here? Some more descriptions or commands/snippets?

Reviewer 4: HI @MichalMaler I'm not sure replacing `You can now test ...` which finalizes what has been described above with `.. Test...` sounds right, it becomes somehow disconnected...
That command is all what is needed for Ngrok to support Let's Encrypt ACME challenges correctly. FYI, @cescoffier added another clarification here explaining what exactly NGrok does in this case.
